Blog Post for Jan-Feb features (#444)
neuroinformatics-unit/movement: docs/source/blog/arc-collaboration.md

---
blogpost: true

> date: Feb 28, 2025

Author: Yeah - we may also need to change the (new) "What's New" section, depending on when this is merged relative to the other movement PRs. Will tag @niksirbi here just so that, if he notices [some of these features](https://github.com/neuroinformatics-unit/movement/pull/444/files#diff-072767678089336d8439fcdbcdbd9e40b46592c90c37ad17f7295935fd79e65dR85) have actually become features, he can flag it to us!

---
blogpost: true
date: Feb 28, 2025
author: Will Graham
location: London, England
category: update
language: English
---

# Spatial Navigation Feature Update

_This is a short summary of the spatial navigation features introduced during Jan-Feb 2025._

> This work was part of a collaboration involving Sepiedeh Keshavarzi (Cambridge University), ARC (UCL), and the core `movement` development team and has been funded by the Wellcome Trust.

Reviewer: I would spell out "ARC". Most visitors to thir website won't know what that means.

*At a glance*

> - **Regions of Interest**: An RoI backend was added for analysis of RoIs, allowing future development of the napari plugin.

Reviewer: Very minor preference for my version.
```suggestion
- **Regions of Interest (RoIs)**: A backend was added for analysis of RoIs, allowing future development of the napari plugin.
```

- **Plot Wrapper Functions**: Added to aid in initial "eyeballing" of data, making it easy to create common analysis plots with a single line of code.

> - **New examples**: [Extend your analysis methods along data dimensions](https://movement.neuroinformatics.dev/examples/broadcasting_your_own_methods.html#sphx-glr-examples-broadcasting-your-own-methods-py), [Pupil tracking](https://movement.neuroinformatics.dev/examples/mouse_eye_movements.html).

Reviewer: Maybe you can use the specific sphinx-gallery syntax for cross-referencing examples (instead of the bery long URLs)?

Reviewer: See https://sphinx-gallery.github.io/stable/advanced.html#cross-referencing

RoIs are essentially labelled regions in space that have some significance in the experimental setup - the location of a nest, or the extent of the enclosure, for example.
By providing a way to store and describe these objects within `movement`, analysis workflows can be simplified and can make use of the existing "backend" functions to provide convenient access to interesting quantities; such as the distance of each individual from a RoI, or the relative orientation of an individual from the nearest wall of the enclosure.

There were also a few independent bursts of development in other areas; including providing sample pupillometry data and an example workflow showing how `movement` can be used to explore different aspects of the data (e.g. position, velocity, and diameter of the pupil), and how to normalise and filter the data.

A copy of the original roadmap that was [shared on Zulip](https://neuroinformatics.zulipchat.com/#narrow/channel/406001-Movement/topic/Roadmap.3A.20Spatial.20Navigation/near/495022291) is provided below.

![Original feature roadmap for Jan-Feb.](../_static/blog_posts/roadmap-jan-feb-2025.png)

## What's Been Introduced?

> In addition to the topic listed below, we have also introduced the following smaller, self-contained features to `movement`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to the topics listed below, we have also introduced the following smaller, self-contained features to `movement`:
```

> - We have new sample datasets available, including two eye-movement tracking (pupillometry) datasets. An example of how to analyse this data using `movement` was introduced in [#429](https://github.com/neuroinformatics-unit/movement/pull/429) and can be found [here](https://movement.neuroinformatics.dev/examples/mouse_eye_movements.html#sphx-glr-examples-mouse-eye-movements-py).

Reviewer: Again consider using the specific cross-regerencing syntax for examples:

https://sphinx-gallery.github.io/stable/advanced.html#cross-referencing

> - It is now possible to scale `DataArray`s expressed in pixels into other units via the {func}`movement.transforms.scale` function. Introduced in [#384](https://github.com/neuroinformatics-unit/movement/pull/384).

Reviewer: For all links going to the movement github or zulip, you can use the "shortcuts" `movement-github` and `movement-zulip` (as in the suggestion below). Such "shortcuts" are defined in the `myst_url_schemes` dict in `conf.py`

It helps to keep things tidy, meaning that if, for example, we move the zulip, we have to update only is one place.

```suggestion
- It is now possible to scale `DataArray`s expressed in pixels into other units via the {func}`movement.transforms.scale` function. Introduced in [#384](movement-github:pull/384).
```

Additionally, we have begun planning our approach to supporting annotations in time, via what we are calling [condition arrays](https://github.com/neuroinformatics-unit/movement/issues/418).
[RoIs](#regions-of-interest-rois) provide us with a way to annotate regions in space, and the natural next step is to provide a way of supporting annotations in time too.
Time annotations might correspond to certain stimuli in an experiment - the introduction of a reward or a change in the environment for example - and being able to refer to the corresponding time-points in an analysis by the names of these events would be very useful.
Being able to have these events interact seamlessly with RoIs is also highly desirable.
At present, we have started on [one such feature](https://github.com/neuroinformatics-unit/movement/pull/421/files), for determining the time-points at which (multiple) RoIs were occupied.
It is early days currently, but you can join in the conversation for what's planned [over on GitHub](https://github.com/neuroinformatics-unit/movement/issues/418).

### Plotting Made Easier

> The {mod}`movement.plots` submodule has been created, which provides some helpful wrapper functions for producing some of the more common plot types that come out of the analysis of `movement` datasets.

Reviewer: The ``{mod}`movement.plots` `` reference doens't resolve because the API docs pages are generate per file, and no such file exists. I'd suggest goig got simple monospace rendering here, and cross-referencing the functions specificly later, if you wish.

These plots can be added to existing figure axes you have created, and you can pass them the same formatting arguments as you would to the appropriate `matplotlib.pyplot`.

> Currently, the submodule has two wrappers to use;

Reviewer: Was this supposed to be a colon?
```suggestion
Currently, the submodule has two wrappers to use:
```

The data-structures that `movement` relies on - and the analysis methods it provides - go a long way to making this kind of analysis easy, thanks to array broadcasting.
However when it comes to writing your own, custom analysis functions, most of the time it is much easier to write a function that takes in a single input, rather than writing an appropriate function that acts on an entire `DataArray`.
But this approach typically means that you're then stuck writing a `for` loop over the values in your `DataArray`, and on top of that having to copy across the dimension labels or coordinates into the new array you're making as the `for` loop runs.

With this in mind, we have decided to expose the {func}`movement.utils.broadcasting.make_broadcastable` decorator, which can turn functions that take in one-dimensional data (e.g., a single spatial coordinate, or a single time-point) into functions that act across `DataArray`s with appropriate dimensions.
You can find a new {ref}`example <sphx_glr_examples_broadcasting_your_own_methods.py>` on how to use this decorator on your own functions.

### Regions of Interest (RoIs)

> One of the biggest feature introductions to `movement` during this period is {mod}`support for RoIs <movement.roi>`.

Reviewer: The ``{mod}`support for RoIs <movement.roi>` `` is reference is broken for the same reason that `movement.plot` doesn't work, there is no target file.

We now support one-dimensional regions of interest (segments, or piecewise-linear structures formed of multiple segments) as well as two-dimensional polygonal regions.

> You can create RoIs using the {class}`movement.roi.LineOfInterest` and {class}`movement.roi.PolygonOfInterest` classes respectively.

Reviewer: These class links don't work properly. I'd do something lile this:

```md
{class}`PolygonOfInterest <movement.roi.polygon.PolygonOfInterest>`
```

Author: Weird that `sphinx` can't seem to follow imports from `__init__`, but I guess there's good reason for that!

There are more details about how the class is implemented on top of [`shapely`](https://shapely.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) in the {class}`docstring <movement.roi.base.BaseRegionOfInterest>`, and a note about how the interior of 2D shapes is handled.

RoIs support the calculation of certain quantities from experimental data.

> Highlights include;

Reviewer: Again, is the semicolon intentional or should it be a colon?

Author: I think it started out as a sentence with several clauses before I just bit the bullet and made it into a list (like many of the lists in this post!)

- Determining if a given point(s) is inside the RoI, {func}`movement.roi.base.BaseRegionOfInterest.contains_point`.
- Determining the distance from a given point(s) to the closest point on the RoI, {func}`movement.roi.base.BaseRegionOfInterest.compute_distance_to`.
- Determining the approach vector from a given point(s) to the RoI, {func}`movement.roi.base.BaseRegionOfInterest.compute_approach_vector`.

> - Determining egocentric and allocentric boundary angles, relative to a given RoI. See {func}`movement.roi.base.BaseRegionOfInterest.compute_allocentric_angle_to_nearest_point` and {func}`movement.roi.base.BaseRegionOfInterest.compute_egocentric_angle_to_nearest_point` for more information.

Reviewer: Because the full function paths are too long here, I would again reach for a syntax like this:

```
{func}`BaseRegionOfInterest.contains_point() <movement.roi.base.BaseRegionOfInterest.contains_point>
```

Reviewer: If you decide to run with this, obviously apply it across the bullet points. Also fine if you keep thinks as they are.

### What's next?

We have [an example underway](https://github.com/neuroinformatics-unit/movement/issues/415) that will demonstrate how to load in a dataset, define a region of interest, and query the loaded trajectories for the time periods when they were inside or outside the defined region.
We also have [another example in the works](https://github.com/neuroinformatics-unit/movement/pull/440) that will go through the boundary-angle methods.

> Looking forward, [we will be aiming to](https://github.com/neuroinformatics-unit/movement/issues/378) extend the `napari` plugin's capabilities to allow users to define RoIs graphically, from within the `napari` GUI, by clicking points to define regions.

Reviewer: Maybe cross link "capabilities" to the new GUI user guide here
